# Seminar on June 07, 2022

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__   Business Model Patterns and Sustainability
* __Presenter:__ Hans-Gert Gräbe

## Abstract

The importance of sustainable and ecological aspects in management has been a
topic of public awareness at least since the reports on "Limits to Growth" by
the Club of Rome. While in the early years the debate focused on the finite
nature of available natural resources and thus on longer-term developments in
availability of a _material basis_ (such as "peak oil"), in the last 20 years
it has become increasingly visible that global _processes_ will leave familiar
paths much earlier if the established industrial mode of production which is
the basis of our prosperity will be continued and further expanded.

In contrast to other globalisation processes such as, e.g., the implementation
of Intellectual Property Rights, these processes do not originate and were
driven by individual interest groups, but have the _cooperative action_ of an
inherently global "thinking" of a networked, interdisciplinary science as
their basis. The problematisation was initiated and formed by international
bodies and today plays an increasingly important role in the framework of
international political affairs. The formula "think globally, act locally"
nevertheless expresses that those global challenges can only be met through
changed local action. Corresponding awareness-raising processes at the
socio-cultural and political level have meanwhile reached such a degree that
at least a financially potent middle class combines economic decisions with
ecological and social issues.

With the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) adopted in 2015 by the UN, the
politicisation of this issue has reached a new dimension, as these goals
anchor long-term goals of necessary changes with today's cooperate actions.
The anchoring of these goals as a "Triple Bottom Line: Planet - People -
Profit" (Elkington 1997) in socio-economic debates at the same time reveals
massive contradictory dimensions in the inclusion of ecological (planet) and
social (people) goals in economic processes.

In the seminar, approaches will be presented and discussed on how such
contradictions can be mapped in Business Models, how they can be solved in
their practical implementation, and which proven patterns emerge in the sense
of an institutionalisation of approved cooperative action.

- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainable_Development_Goals>
- <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_bottom_line>

## Literature

* Florian Lüdeke-Freund, Sarah Carroux, Alexandre Joyce, Lorenzo Massa,
  Henning Breuer (2018). The sustainable business model pattern taxonomy — 45
  patterns to support sustainability-oriented business model innovation.
  Sustainable Production and Consumption, Volume 15, pp. 145-162.
  <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2018.06.004>

* Lorenzo Maccioni, Yuri Borgianni, Daniela C. A. Pigosso (2019).  Can the
  choice of eco-design principles affect products’ success?  Design Science,
  vol. 5, e25.  <https://doi.org/10.1017/dsj.2019.24>

* Davide Russo, Malte Schöfer, Giacomo Bersano (2015).  Supporting
  ECO-innovation in SMEs by TRIZ Eco-guidelines. Proc. TRIZ Future 2011-2014.
  Procedia Engineering 131 (2015), 831-839.

* Davide Russo, Christian Spreafico (2020).  TRIZ-Based Guidelines for
  Eco-Improvement. Sustainability 2020, 12, 3412.
  <https://doi.org/10.3390/su12083412>

## Material

- [Handout](Handout.pdf)
- [Slides](Slides.pdf)
