\documentclass[11pt,a4paper]{article}
\usepackage{ls}
\usepackage[english]{babel}

\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-2}

\title{Concept for the Research Seminar\\ "Systematic Innovation Methodology"}

\author{Hans-Gert Gr\"abe, Ken Pierre Kleemann, Nadine Schumann (Uni
  Leipzig),\\ Ralf Laue, Kristin Kutzner (WH Zwickau) }

\date{March 29, 2022}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\section{Aim and methodology of the seminar}

The concept of a \emph{system} plays a prominent role in computer science when
it comes to database systems, software systems, hardware systems, accounting
systems, access systems, etc.  In general, computer science is regarded by a
majority as the "science of the \emph{systematic} representation, storage,
processing and transmission of information, especially their automatic
processing using digital computers" (German Wikipedia).  Also certain relevant
professions such as the \emph{system architect} are in high esteem by IT
users.

However, the significance of the concept of system extends far beyond the
field of computer science -- it is fundamental for all engineering sciences
and as \emph{Systems Engineering} with the ISO/IEC/IEEE-15288 standard
"Systems and Software Engineering", it is also the subject of international
standardisation processes.  Even more, the concept of systems also plays an
important role in the description of complex natural and cultural processes --
for instance in the concept of an \emph{ecosystem}.

While classical TRIZ focuses strongly on instrumentally feasible engineering
solutions, Systems Engineering "is an interdisciplinary field of engineering
and engineering management that focuses on how to design, integrate, and
manage complex systems over their life cycles. At its core, systems
engineering utilizes systems thinking principles to organize this body of
knowledge. The individual outcome of such efforts, an engineered system, can
be defined as a combination of components that work in synergy to collectively
perform a useful function." (English Wikipedia). 

Earlier in this seminar, we had already studied more intensively different
system concepts and, in particular, examined their application in complex
socio-ecological, socio-economic and socio-technical contexts, see
\cite{Graebe2020}. We observed that the central concepts of \emph{transition
  management} and \emph{activity management} addressed two different
perspectives on structural change processes. In the transition management
approach, the structural-transitional challenges are in the foreground, the
activity management approach studies the implementation of structural changes
via the actions and co-actions of actors and stakeholders.

In both approaches, however, the focus was on a holistic-structural and
analytical view of a \emph{decision preparation} rather than on practical
procedural management approaches of \emph{decision-making} and decision
implementation in complex and contradictory real-world situations.

The WUMM project\footnote{WUMM stands in German for \emph{Widerspr체che und
    Managementmethoden} (Contradictions and Management Methods).} aims at a
better understanding of such management processes. Our starting point is TRIZ
as a systematic innovation methodology derived from engineering experience in
contradictory requirement situations. With the field of "Business TRIZ", which
has been unfolding for about 20 years, a transfer of experience is being
actively promoted, embedded in older management cultures and theories.  A
better understanding of such approaches to management issues and their
connection to systemic concepts and approaches was in the focus of our seminar
last semester.

In recent years, co-operative action by differently specialised experts has
become increasingly important.  In such interdisciplinary work contexts, the
development of \emph{common conceptual systems} of sufficient performance
proves to be a difficult problem that can be supported by digital semantic
technologies.  Parallel to these challenges \emph{agile approaches} play a
major role, not only in the field of management, but also increasingly in the
solution of socio-technical and engineering problems concerning ongoing
co-operative actions in multi-stakeholder contexts -- for example with the
concept of \emph{technical ecosystems}.

\textbf{In the seminar}, we want to learn more about such modern management
appoaches in cooperative actions in which \emph{common conceptualisations} and
\emph{consensus-oriented decision-making processes} are central and of crucial
importance for the success and ways of formation and consolidation of new
systemic structures.  We are particularly interested in the connection between
the dialectical resolution of contradictory requirement situations in the
sense of TRIZ methodology and the emergence of common conceptual and
notational worlds as a result of the application of suitable semantic web
technologies.  A special emphasis will be put on the work of the
\emph{Methodological School of Management} and the Moscow Methodological
Circle around G.P. Shchedrovitsky \cite{MSM}.

The seminar is a \textbf{research seminar} in which we jointly explore
different aspects of co-operative action in different management concepts.
With this seminar, we are approaching a topic that is new to us, which offers
the opportunity to participate in a joint academic explorative process on a
basis of equals. This bears opportunities, but also challenges.  The students
are expected to actively participate in the seminar through seminar
discussions, presentations and last but not least by reading the relevant
materials.  For the successful completion of the seminar, a topic has to be
presented as discussion leader and a handout of 2--3 pages on the topic has to
be submitted in advance.

The seminar is accompanied by a \textbf{lecture} \emph{Modelling Sustainable
  Systems and Semantic Web} (Thursdays 9-11 a.m.) in which important concepts
of our interdisciplinary course programme such as
\begin{itemize}[noitemsep]
\item technology as a whole of socially available procedural knowledge,
  institutionalised procedures and private procedural skills, 
\item sustainability requirements in systemic concepts,
\item digital change and concepts of semantic web technologies,
\item concept and knowledge formation processes,
\item cooperative action, network economies and open culture
\end{itemize}
are developed in more detail. The lecture and the seminar are not directly
related to each other, but conceptual frameworks developed in the lecture will
be heavily present in the seminar. There is a slide stack \cite{Slides}
available from the lecture in the previous semester.

All materials and seminar reports that can be made publicly available, will be
published in the github repository
\url{https://github.com/wumm-project/Seminar-S22}.

\section{Seminar Organisation}

The seminar will be held weekly on Tuesdays 9-11 a.m.  synchronously online.
Prior to each appointment participants have to study the assigned reading to
be in a position to discuss the problems in the seminar.  The seminar is
moderated by a \emph{discussion leader}, who prepares a short workout of 2--3
pages and makes it available to the participants in advance \emph{before the
  seminar} (by Sunday evening).

Students of Leipzig University find more about the seminar in the Saxonian
e-learning platform
OPAL\footnote{\url{https://bildungsportal.sachsen.de/opal/} -- Course
  S22.BIS.SIM.}.  The platform will be used for organisational purposes only.
The \textbf{primary source for the seminar plan} is the (actual version of
the) file \texttt{Seminarplan.md} in the github repository \emph{Seminar-S22}.

\section{Examination. Topics for Seminar Work}

In order to successfully complete the seminar module, one of the seminars has
to be moderated as discussion leader, for this seminar a short workout has to
be prepared and made available to the participants and a Seminar Paper (about
20 pages) has to be written.

The seminar grade results from the evaluation of this Seminar Paper, which has
to be completed until the end of the semester on September 30, 2022.

\section{Privacy}

We follow an Open Culture approach not only theoretically, but also
practically and make course materials publicly available.  This also applies
to the course materials you have to produce (presentations, seminar papers) as
well as to (annotated) chat sessions of the seminar discussions, in which your
names are also mentioned.  We assume your consent to this procedure if you do
not explicitly object.  The seminar discussions themselves are \textbf{not}
recorded.

To simplify the further use of the materials and texts, the papers are asked
to be compiled in English using {\LaTeX}.  Also the {\LaTeX} source should be
provided under the terms of the
CC-BY\footnote{\url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/}} license in
order to create a corresponding corpus of texts that can be used to accompany
similar efforts in the OpenDiscovery project. Of course, this cannot be
"decreed". \textbf{Please inform the seminar instructor if you do not wish to
  make your work available for exchange under these conditions}.

\section{Seminar plan}

The seminar starts on April 19, 2022 with a kick-off meeting.  The exact
topics and themes will be published at the beginning of the seminar, when the
number of participants can be estimated more precisely.

A non-exhaustive list of possible topics for student presentations is compiled
in the \emph{Seminar Plan}.

\begin{thebibliography}{xxx}
\bibitem{Graebe2020} Hans-Gert Gr채be, Ken Pierre Kleemann (2020). Seminar
  Systemtheorie. Universit채t Leipzig. Wintersemester 2019/20 (in German).
  Rohrbacher Manuskripte, Heft 22. ISBN 9783752620023.
\bibitem{Slides} Hans-Gert Gr채be (2022). Slide Stack of the Lecture.
  Leipzig University, Winter Term 2022.\\
  \url{http://www.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/~graebe/skripte/Folien-W21.zip}
\bibitem{MSM} Shchedrovitsky, G. P. (2014). Selected Works. A Guide to the
  Methodology of Organisation, Leadership and Management. In: Viktor
  B. Khristenko, Andrei G. Reus, Alexander P. Zinchenko et
  al. (2014). Methodological School of Management. Bloomsbury Publishing.
  ISBN 978-1-4729-1029-5.

  Available as e-book at UB Leipzig\\
  \url{https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/leip/detail.action?docID=6159470}
\end{thebibliography}

\end{document}
