# Seminar on June 14, 2022

## Short Announcement

* __Theme:__ Contradiction Elimination
* __Presenter:__ Immanuel von Detten

## Abstract

Analysis and resolution of conflicting requirements is one of the central
methodological elements of TRIZ.  In chapter 11 of his book Darrell Mann first
introduces the terms trade-off, conflict and compromise. Trade-offs occur when
two evaluation parameters of the system behave in opposite ways when the
conditions are varied - the improvement of one parameter leads to the
deterioration of the other. Compromise means finding the point in phase space
where the trade-off is best tolerated, and ultimately often leads to numerical
parameter optimisation in the (model of the) system itself.

For difficult problems, such optimisation is not sufficient and the question
arises to change the phase space itself by changing the system or its
operating conditions, thus leaving the old constraint of varying the
conditions. For such an "elimination of compromise" in the words of Darrell
Mann, TRIZ has worked out 40 general procedures (principles) to solve such
_technical contradictions_.

"Variation of conditions" in a system can often itself be described by
parameter variation of action (or control) parameters. The functional
dependencies in the corresponding mathematical models are the basis for the
parameter optimisation as _compromise_ described above. Technical
contradictions between two evaluation parameters often can be expressed as
contradictory behaviour of a single action parameter, which at the same time
should take mutually exclusive values.  This suggests a general way to solve
such a _physical contradiction_: refine the modelling by different separation
approaches for the action parameter. This is discussed in more detail in
chapter 12 of the book and the relation to the more extensive list of 40
principles is established.

## Literature

Chapter 12. (Mann-2007, pp. 337 ff)

## Material

- [Handout](Handout.pdf)