# Anmerkungen zum Seminar am 19.04.2022

## Zum Kursangebot (in German)

Das Kursangebot im Master Informatik besteht aus
* der Vorlesung “Modelling Sustainable Systems and Semantic Web”, do 9-13 Uhr
  im Raum SG 3-15
* und dem Seminar “Systematic Innovation Methodology”, synchron online, di
  9-11 Uhr,

Fakultativ kann ein kostenpflichtiger Zertifikatskurs "Einführung in das
Problemlösen mit TRIZ" belegt werden.

Folien und Handouts zu Vorlesung und Seminar sind in englischer Sprache, da
international Interesse an der Verfolgung unserer Debatten besteht.  Die
Vorlesung und auch die Seminardiskussionen werden wieder in der Regel in
deutsch stattfinden. Ausnahmen im Seminar sind möglch.

__Vorlesung und Seminar__ können als __5 LP Seminarmodul__ 10-202-2312
"Angewandte Informatik" angerechnet werden. Prüfungsvorleistung ist ein Vortrag
im Seminar. Als Prüfungsleistung ist bis zum Ende des Semesters (30.09.2022)
eine Seminararbeit anzufertigen.

Bitte schreiben Sie sich zügig im OPAL in den Kurs S22.BIS.SIM ein, damit der
Kurs entsprechend genauer geplant werden kann.

## Plan of the course (in English)

See also [the Slides](Slides.pdf).

### Modelling Sustainable Systems and Semantic Web

The Semantic Web extends the Web in order to make data easier to exchange
between computers and make it easier to use; for example, the term "Bremen" in
a web document can be supplemented with information as to whether it refers to
a ship with that name, a family name or the town "Bremen".  This additional
information makes information explicit in otherwise unstructured data.  To add
such information in a formalised way Semantic Web standards for the
publication and use of machine-readable data (especially RDF) are applied.
([More about Semantic Web](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_Web))

This is a _very technical_ view that does not take into account, _why_ these
distinctions are relevant at all.  In this more general sense __Semantic Web
Technologies are concerned with the sharpening of the meaning of concepts in
particular contexts__.

These challenges are part of another core informatics competence &ndash; the
ability to elicit corresponding requirement complexes within the framework of
_Requirements Engineering_, to structure and finally to model them.

The focus of the _lecture_ is on the connection of these two complexes of
competences, whereby it is assumed that students in computer science already
have a basic knowledge of both areas.  In the lecture we discuss in more detail 
- technology as combination of globally available procedural knowledge,
  institutionalised procedures and private procedural skills,
- sustainability requirements and systemic concepts,
- digital change and concepts of Semantic Web technologies,
- concept and knowledge formation processes,
- cooperative action, network economies and Open Culture.

A special focus is on the _resolution of contradictory requirement situations_
as the core of systematic innovation methodologies such as TRIZ.

### Research Seminar

Systematic innovation methodologies such as TRIZ are essentially based on a
better understanding of the development dynamics of corresponding (technical
and non-technical) systems.  The results are rooted in engineering experience
from structured processes of planning, implementation and operation of
technical systems. Increasingly, cooperative interdisciplinary collaboration
matters rather than the one brilliant mind that commands thousand hands. The
socio-technical character of contradictions is thereby intensified and opens
up new dimensions of contradiction management.

Today, managers face similar challenges when it comes to placing
decision-making processes on a systematic basis, aligning the processes under
control with long term goals, and also achieving the targeted goal corridors.
It turns out that many engineering experiences on structured procedures in
contradictory requirement situations can be transferred to this area, which
has been investigated within the topic "TRIZ and Business" for 20 years.  __In
the seminar__, we want to study the development in that area in more detail
and relate it to more general modelling aspects of Business Processes,
Business Systems and Business Models.

The seminar is a __research seminar__ in which we will jointly study different
aspects of our topics and relate them to each other and to systemic thinking
and TRIZ approaches.

Students are expected to actively participate in the seminar through
discussions, presentations and last but not least by reading the relevant
materials.  For the successful completion of the seminar, a topic has to be
prepared as a discussion leader and a 2-3 page handout has to be submitted in
advance.

Further details on the concept and procedure can be found in the [handout
"Seminar Concept"](../Seminarconcept.pdf) as well as in the ["Seminar
plan"](../Seminarplan.md) in this github Repo.

### The Concept of the Course

In this course, the focus is on the prerequisites and conditions associated
with sharpening the meaning of terms in concrete contexts.  [Technical issues
of the Semantic Web](https://www.semantic-web-grundlagen.de/) will be
addressed only marginally, as we assume that sufficient materials exist on the
web to learn more about such concepts to the extent required for practical
purposes, especially in the context of the seminar papers to be written. If
necessary, individual additional dates will be offered in which specific
aspects of greater interest will be discussed.

The course is designed at an __interdisciplinary academic level__. 

__Interdisciplinary__ means that colleagues from different areas are involved
&ndash; Simon Johanning (business information systems), Ken Pierre Kleemann,
Nadine Schumann (philosophy), Ralf Laue and Hans-Gert Gräbe (computer
science).

__Academic__ means that we want to work with each other and with you &ndash;
especially in the seminar &ndash; at equal level. It is about rational
argumentation on a scientific level, i.e. we count for _arguments_ and not
apodictic truths.

We are aware that this is a __high demand__ especially on preparation for
these events in your self-study, but we assume that these efforts will pay
off.
